Web exports guide (#15)
godot-rust/gdext-book: src/toolchain/export-web.md

  rustup component add rust-src --toolchain nightly
  rustup target add wasm32-unknown-emscripten --toolchain nightly
  ```

Next, install Emscripten.  The simplest way to achieve this is to install `emsdk` from the git repo. Recommended to use version 3.1.39 for now[^1]

```sh
git clone https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk.git
cd emsdk
./emsdk install 3.1.39
./emsdk activate 3.1.39
source ./emsdk.sh     (or ./emsdk.bat on windows)
```

It would also be HIGHLY recommended to follow the instructions in the terminal to add `emcc`[^2] to your `PATH`.
If not, it is necessary to manually `source` the `emsdk.sh` file in every new terminal prior to compilation.
This is platform-specific.

---

## Project Configuration

Enable the `experimental-wasm` feature on `gdext` in the `Cargo.toml` file.
It is also strongly recommended to enable the `lazy-function-tables` feature to avoid an extremely long compile time with release builds.
It is likely to due a bug, but is still being investigated.  Edit the line to something like the following:

```toml
godot = { git = "https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext", branch = "master", features = ["experimental-wasm", "lazy-function-tables"] }
```

> At the same level as your `Cargo.toml`, create a `.config` directory and inside of that,

Reviewer: Edit: turns out I had already suggested this above, sorry lol
Keeping this here anyway for future reference :p

```suggestion
At the same level as your `Cargo.toml`, create a `.cargo` directory and, inside of that,
```

<!--
  ~ This Source Code Form is subject to the terms of the Mozilla Public
  ~ License, v. 2.0. If a copy of the MPL was not distributed with this
  ~ file, You can obtain one at https://mozilla.org/MPL/2.0/.
-->

# Intro to Web Builds

Web builds are a fair bit more difficult to get started with compared to native builds.
This will be a complete guide on how to get things compiled.
However, setting up a web server to host and share your game is considered out of scope of this guide, and is best explained elsewhere.

> Information to consider before starting:

Reviewer 2: This should no longer be necessary, the yellow warning box draws enough attention.

Author: Line 14?

Reviewer 2: Yes, only this part:
```
Information to consider before starting:
```

```admonish warning
Web support with `gdext` is experimental and should be understood as such before proceeding.
```

> ---

Reviewer 2: As previously noted, these horizontal lines as title separators should go, we don't use them anywhere else.

> ## Installing Pre-Requisites

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Installing pre-requisites
```

Reviewer 2: ^

Install a nightly build of `rustc`, the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target for `rustc`, and `rust-src`.

> The reason that a nightly `rustc` is required is that nightly is required to build `std` (`-Zbuild-std`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The reason why nightly `rustc` is required is the unstable flag to build `std` ([`-Zbuild-std`][flag-build-std]).
```

With
```
[flag-build-std]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/unstable.html#list-of-unstable-features
```

Assuming that Rust was installed with `rustup`, this is quite simple.

  ```sh
  rustup toolchain install nightly
  rustup component add rust-src --toolchain nightly
  rustup target add wasm32-unknown-emscripten --toolchain nightly
  ```

> Next, install Emscripten.  The simplest way to achieve this is to install `emsdk` from the git repo. Recommended to use version 3.1.39 for now[^1]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, install Emscripten. The simplest way to achieve this is to install [`emsdk` from the git repo][emsdk-git]. 
We recommend version 3.1.39 for now.[^1]
```
with:
```
[emsdk-git]: https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk#readme
```
(also added trailing full-stop).

```sh
git clone https://github.com/emscripten-core/emsdk.git
cd emsdk
./emsdk install 3.1.39
./emsdk activate 3.1.39
source ./emsdk.sh     (or ./emsdk.bat on windows)
```

> It would also be HIGHLY recommended to follow the instructions in the terminal to add `emcc`[^2] to your `PATH`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It would also be **highly** recommended to follow the instructions in the terminal to add `emcc`[^2] to your `PATH`.
```

If not, it is necessary to manually `source` the `emsdk.sh` file in every new terminal prior to compilation.
This is platform-specific.

---

## Project Configuration

> Enable the `experimental-wasm` feature on `gdext` in the `Cargo.toml` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Enable the `experimental-wasm` feature on gdext in the `Cargo.toml` file.
```

gdext is a name, not a symbol (you can't know that, but we don't format it elsewhere, either) 🙂

Author: I think I was just going with marking anything technical name/cli ish to mark in backticks like that. I'll remove the other two instances of it for gdext then.

It is also strongly recommended to enable the `lazy-function-tables` feature to avoid an extremely long compile time with release builds.
It is likely to due a bug, but is still being investigated.  Edit the line to something like the following:

```toml

> godot = { git = "https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext", branch = "master", features = ["experimental-wasm", "lazy-function-tables"] }

Reviewer 2: Since this line gets very long, we should probably format the TOML like this instead:
```suggestion
[dependencies.godot]
git = "https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext"
branch = "master"
features = ["experimental-wasm", "lazy-function-tables"]
```

Also, do you recommend using `lazy-function-tables` as a default? If yes, should we later consider enabling this implicitly if `experimental-wasm` is chosen?

In other words, can you build WASM without `lazy-functino-tables`, and what's the cost?

Reviewer: This was discussed here: https://discord.com/channels/723850269347283004/1134478713002655876/1176953138742313071

TL;DR:
Yes, you can build WASM without that flag. However, `release` builds take _much_ longer when default features (and thus all of codegen) are enabled. Thus, it _should_ be recommended to use `lazy-function-tables` by default.

Still, I defended not making it a dependency of `experimental-wasm`, mostly to let devs tinker with gdext as is needed for their own game to run, and perhaps disabling `lazy-function-tables` on WASM could be needed to debug a particular problem with FFI calls, for example.

As a matter of fact, _some_ gdext games compiled to WASM without `lazy-function-tables` error before starting because [some function(s) seem(s) to be causing a panic on load](https://discord.com/channels/723850269347283004/1134478713002655876/1171632248450191370) or something [(apparently `AnimationPlayer::set_reset_on_save_enabled` is one of them?)](https://discord.com/channels/723850269347283004/1134478713002655876/1171635323197997176). Which makes me wonder if the same function(s) could cause the same problem while on `lazy-function-tables` (just, however, delayed). So disabling `lazy-function-tables` could be useful to assess those problems.

Alternatively, we could use something like `#[cfg(any(all(experimental-wasm, not(eager-wasm-functions)), lazy-function-tables))]` or something like that instead of `#[cfg(lazy-function-tables)]` where applicable so that WASM builds default to lazy but have an option to enable "eager" mode. But that'd make the feature set complex and is likely not worth it.

Overall, might be worth it to give some more thought to this matter first before making a final decision.

Author: Without `lazy-function-tables` it takes about 10 minutes to compile on release, vs about 30 seconds with it, on my m3 pro mac.  Also, with it off it seems to crash whilst generating the cache table, for me at least.  I hadn't spent that much time looking into it, but I guess it's more of a "very strongly recommended" instead of required? Hopefully...

Reviewer 2: I see, thanks for elaboration!

In that case I would add a comment to the above TOML snippet, saying that the feature is not strictly required, but can help compile times (at the cost of a tiny bit slower function calls).

Reviewer 2: ^

```

> If you do not already have `.cargo/config.toml` file, do the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you do not already have a `.cargo/config.toml` file, do the following:
```

Reviewer 2: ^

- Create a `.cargo` directory at the same level as your `Cargo.toml`.
- Inside of that directory, create a `config.toml` file.

> The contents of this file need to contain the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This file needs to contain the following:
```

```toml
[target.wasm32-unknown-emscripten]
rustflags = [
    "-C", "link-args=-sSIDE_MODULE=2",
    "-C", "link-args=-sUSE_PTHREADS=1",
    "-C", "target-feature=+atomics,+bulk-memory,+mutable-globals",
    "-Zlink-native-libraries=no"
]
```

Edit the project's `.gdextension` file to include support for web exports.
This file will probably be at `godot/{YourCrate}.gdextension`.
The format will be similar to the following:

> ```gdextension

Reviewer 2: Using ```ini here would at least provide some syntax highlighting.

> web.debug.wasm32 = "res://../rust/target/wasm32-unknown-emscripten/debug/EXTENSIONNAME.wasm"
> web.release.wasm32 = "res://../rust/target/wasm32-unknown-emscripten/release/EXTENSIONNAME.wasm"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
...

[libraries]
...
web.debug.wasm32 = "res://../rust/target/wasm32-unknown-emscripten/debug/EXTENSIONNAME.wasm"
web.release.wasm32 = "res://../rust/target/wasm32-unknown-emscripten/release/EXTENSIONNAME.wasm"
```

<br>

Also, would you need to replace `EXTENSIONNAME` with `{YourCrate}` here?

Author: Not sure about the flag! Actually didn't notice that I had an older one on my personal config file.

```

---

## Compile the Project

Verify `emcc` is in the `PATH`. This can be as simple as doing the following:

```sh
emcc --version
```

Compile the code.
It is necessary to both use the nightly compiler and specify to build std[^3], along with specifying the Emscripten target.

```sh
cargo +nightly build -Zbuild-std --target wasm32-unknown-emscripten
```

---

## Godot Editor Setup

Add a web export in the Godot Editor. In the top menu bar, go to `Project > Export...` and configure it there.

> Make sure to turn on the `Extensions Support` checkbox.

Reviewer 2: Should we mention to download export templates if they are not yet configured?

Author: I think you get a prompt if it's missing to download it, and should be downloaded at the same time you'd download templates for any other export.  I'd have to intentionally trigger that and see about that.

Reviewer: From the last time I tried it in my VM, I believe the Export window displays some red text at the bottom suggesting you need Export Templates, but I think you still need to click some buttons to prompt the download. Could be useful to list the steps needed, but very briefly.

Reviewer 2: I see. It's fine to not explicitly mention it then.

cd emsdk
./emsdk install 3.1.39
./emsdk activate 3.1.39
source ./emsdk.sh     (or ./emsdk.bat on windows)
```

It would also be **highly** recommended to follow the instructions in the terminal to add `emcc`[^2] to your `PATH`.
If not, it is necessary to manually `source` the `emsdk.sh` file in every new terminal prior to compilation.
This is platform-specific.

## Project Configuration

Enable the `experimental-wasm` feature on gdext in the `Cargo.toml` file.
It is also strongly recommended to enable the `lazy-function-tables` feature to avoid an extremely long compile time with release builds.
It is likely to due a bug, but is still being investigated.  Edit the line to something like the following:

```toml
godot = { git = "https://github.com/godot-rust/gdext", branch = "master", features = ["experimental-wasm", "lazy-function-tables"] }
```

If you do not already have `.cargo/config.toml` file, do the following:

- Create a `.cargo` directory at the same level as your `Cargo.toml`.
- Inside of that directory, create a `config.toml` file.

This file needs to contain the following:

```toml
[target.wasm32-unknown-emscripten]
rustflags = [
    "-C", "link-args=-sSIDE_MODULE=2",

>     "-C", "link-args=-pthread",

Reviewer 2: Thanks for changing this!
Sorry I wasn't very clear before, maybe I'd still mention the old one just in case someone is used to that (otherwise they might wonder where it is).

That is:
```suggestion
    "-C", "link-args=-pthread", # was -sUSE_PTHREADS=1 in earlier versions
```

Author: What part not to mention? Sorry. If you mean line 112 then... that's kinda confusing. I can remove the images about the error for missing templates, I guess.  They don't really add much besides push the page length; it feels like anyway.

Reviewer 2: Just apply my suggestion here, so that people familiar with the old flag aren't confused 🙂 

> I can remove the images about the error for missing templates, I guess. They don't really add much besides push the page length; it feels like anyway.

Yeah, would be good to focus more on the WASM topic, you can remove them.

Make sure to turn on the `Extensions Support` checkbox.

![Example of export screen](images/web-export.png)

If instead the bottom on the export popup contains this error:
> No export template found at expected path:

![Example of missing template](images/web-missing-template.png)

Then click on "Manage Export Templates" and then on the next screen click on "Download and Install"

![Template download popup](images/web-download-template.png)

Back at the main editor screen, there is an option to run the web debug build (_not_ a release build) locally
without needing to run an export or set up a web server.
At the top right, choose `Remote Debug > Run in Browser` and it will automatically open up a web browser.

If your default browser is not Chromium-based (e.g., Firefox or Safari),
you will need to copy the URL (which is usually `http://localhost:8060/tmp_js_export.html`)
and open it in a supported browser such as Google Chrome or Microsoft Edge.[^4]

![Location of built-in web server](images/web-browser-run.png)

## Debugging

Currently the only option for WASM debugging is

> [this extension](https://chromewebstore.google.com/detail/cc++-devtools-support-dwa/pdcpmagijalfljmkmjngeonclgbbannb?pli=1)

Reviewer 2: Could you add the name of the extension in the link text, and use the `[<name of extension>][wasm-debugger]` format (i.e. move the actual link to the end of the section)?

for Chrome. It adds support for breakpoints and a memory viewer into the F12 menu.

> ---

Reviewer 2: Still a horizontal line 😉
